
「原作と地続きになるよう
作品と誠実に向き合った脚本

――原作をお読みになっての印象はいかがでし たか?
 私の「きらら系」のイメージは可愛らしい女の 子たちが登場するものが多いという印象だった のですが、この作品のキャラクターは皆、なかな かの性格だったので、すぐに好きになれて一気 に読み進めていきました。やっぱりキャラクタ ―を好きになれるかどうかが一番大事なので、 そこを最初にクリアできて良かったです。

 ――特にどのキャラクターを気になりました か? 
やっぱり、ひとりちゃんが一番好きかも。いち 視聴者として見たらリョウを一番好きになるか なと思ったんですけど、書く立場となると、ひと りちゃんが一番キャラクターとしての振り幅が大 きいので、書いていて楽しいと思っていました。

——制作に入ったときには、吉田さんはまずど なたとどんな打ち合わせをされたのでしょう か?
 最初は斎藤監督とプロデューサーさんたちと で、この話をどういう構成にしていこうかとい うお話をしていきました。監督とは最初から 「(原作は)いわゆる青春キラキラみたいな感じ ではないですよね」と方向性が合致していたの で、スムーズに話が進みました。「ぼっち・ざ・ろ つく!の青春」は、大人たちが考えたような爽や かで初々しい部分だけが切り取られたようなも のにしたくなかったんです。本来青春ってファ ミレスに行ったとかバイトしたみたいな、日常 生活の中に隠れているものだよねという話をし ました。そういうところを際立たせていけば若 い子にはリアルに思えるでしょうし、大人たち にもリアルな懐かしいキラキラを感じてもらえ るのではないかと。


――リアルという言葉がでてきましたが、リア ルにするために気をつけたことは何でしょう か? 
脚本においては、登場人物がぶっとんでいる けれど、地に足がついている感じを大事にしま した。リアルなライブシーンと交わった時に浮 いたりしないようになっていると思っています し、原作が持つ妙にリアルな人間臭さを表せて いるかと。原作ものをアニメ化する際、キャラ クターの声・動き、住んでいる場所の背景など情 報量が増えていきます。追加される情報の舵取 りが原作ものアニメではかなり重要です。ここ を間違えると原作ファンが「思ってた感じと違 う」と離れていきますし、アニメから原作を読ん だ人も「あれ、なんかアニメと違う」となってし まい危険なので、青春の度合いやキャラの雰囲 気など非常に気を使いました。

 ――シリーズの構成についてはどのように考え て立てられましたか?
 1クール作品として見たときに、大きい山が 2~3個は欲しいなと考えていて、体感的にも 終わりは文化祭あたりかなと思っていました。 それは監督やプロデューサーもおおよそ同じ意 見でした。この作業をしていた頃は、単行本が 2巻まで出ていたので、ここまでであれば原作の意図を変えずにできるかなと思って、ラスト をここに置きました。 
――4コママンガを各話数20分強に落とし込む に当たり、テンポ感はどのように考えましたか? 
私自身の作風が割とテンポが早めなんですが、 この原作であればそのテンポ感を変えずにいけ そうだなと感じました。あとは4コマなのでブ ツ切りにならないように、かといってベタッと伸 ばすようなことがないようなリズムを模索しま した。それにライブシーンもあるので、フィルム としての緩急についてはその部分が担保してく れるだろうとも考えていました。 

――音楽が緩急を作ってくれることをその時点 で信頼されていたんですね。
 はい。スタッフ皆がめちゃくちゃ気合入って いるのが分かりましたし、音楽部分もごまかし たりせず真正面から描こうとする姿勢が脚本打 ち合わせの時点で伝わってきましたので、最初 から信用していましたし、大船に乗った気でい ました。

 ――シリーズ構成をする上で何か悩まれたこと はありましたか? 
悩んだというわけではありませんが、虹夏た ちがひとりの家に来る第7話から最終話までを どう区切っていくかは考えました。文化祭でラ イブが終わってそこで「完」という形にしたくは なかったので切りどころを模索した結果、最終 話はどうしても歌始まりになったんです。これ こそ音楽のチームを信頼するしかないという、 けっこうチャレンジングな構成になったなと思 いつつも、「面白いからいっか」と思って(笑)。そ ういった感じで進むことがこの作品は多かった かもしれないですね。Aパートでライブをやる 構成は元々あって、そこに至るまでにホップ・ス テップが要るかなと思っていたのですが、作って いくうちに「面白いから、いきなり歌始まりにし ちゃう?」という感じで、この流れになりました。 結果、スゴく良かったと思います。

"A script that faithfully confronts the work to be continuous with the original

What was your impression when you read the original? My image of the ‘Kirara series’ was that many cute girls appear, but the characters of this work all had quite a personality, so I liked it immediately and read it all at once. After all, whether you can like the character or not is the most important thing, so I’m glad I could clear that first.

Which character did you particularly care about? After all, I might like Hitori-chan the most. As a viewer, I thought I would like Ryou the most, but when it comes to writing, Hitori-chan has the widest range as a character, so I thought it was fun to write.

When you started production, who did you first meet with and what kind of meeting did you have? At first, I talked with Director Saito and the producers about how to structure this story. From the beginning, the director and I agreed on the direction that ‘(the original) is not a typical youthful sparkle’, so the conversation went smoothly. ‘Bocchi・za・Rock! Youth’ didn’t want to be something that was cut out only by the fresh and innocent part that adults thought. We talked about how youth is something that is hidden in everyday life, like going to a family restaurant or working part-time. If we can highlight such places, young people will feel real, and adults will also feel a real nostalgic sparkle.

The word ‘real’ came up, but what did you pay attention to in order to make it real? In the script, I valued the feeling that the characters are bursting but grounded. I think it’s set up so that it doesn’t float when it intersects with a real live scene, and whether it can express the strangely real human smell that the original has. When animating an original work, the amount of information such as the character’s voice, movement, and the background of the place where they live increases. The steering of the added information is quite important in the anime of the original work. If you make a mistake here, the original fans will leave saying ‘it’s different from what I thought’, and people who read the original from the anime will also say ‘oh, it’s different from the anime’ and it’s dangerous, so I was very careful about the degree of youth and the atmosphere of the character.

How did you think about the composition of the series? When I saw it as a one-cour work, I thought I wanted 2-3 big mountains, and I thought the end would be around the cultural festival. The director and producers also had roughly the same opinion. When I was doing this work, up to two volumes of the book had been published, so I thought I could do it without changing the intention of the original, and I placed the last here.

How did you think about the tempo when you condensed the 4-frame manga into each episode of over 20 minutes? My own style is quite fast in tempo, but I felt that I could go without changing that tempo if it was this original. Also, since it’s a 4-frame, I searched for a rhythm that wouldn’t be cut off, and that wouldn’t stretch out. Also, since there is a live scene, I thought that part would guarantee the slackness as a film.

You trusted that music would create slackness at that point. Yes. I knew that all the staff were very motivated, and the attitude of trying to draw the music part straight without cheating was conveyed at the time of the script meeting, so I trusted it from the beginning and felt like I was on a big ship.

Was there anything you were worried about when you were composing the series? I wasn’t worried, but I thought about how to divide from the 7th episode where Natsuka and others come to Hitori’s house to the final episode. I didn’t want to end the live at the cultural festival and say ‘complete’, so as a result of searching for where to cut, the final episode inevitably started with a song. This is quite a challenging composition, thinking that I have to trust the music team, but I thought, ‘It’s interesting, so it’s okay (laughs)’. There may have been many things that went like this in this work. There was originally a composition to do live in A part, and I thought that hop step would be needed to get there, but as I made it, I thought, ‘It’s interesting, so let’s start the song suddenly?’ This flow became. As a result, I think it was very good.




"一个脚本，忠实地面对作品，使其与原作连续

你读原作的印象如何？ 我对’Kirara系列’的印象是，许多可爱的女孩出现，但这部作品的所有角色都有相当的个性，所以我立即喜欢上了它，并一口气读完了。毕竟，是否能喜欢角色是最重要的，所以我很高兴我能首先清楚这一点。

你特别关心哪个角色？ 毕竟，我可能最喜欢Hitori-chan。作为观众，我想我最喜欢Ryou，但当涉及到写作时，Hitori-chan作为角色的范围最广，所以我觉得写作很有趣。

当你开始制作时，你首先与谁见面，进行了什么样的会议？ 首先，我与导演斋藤和制片人讨论了如何构建这个故事。从一开始，导演和我就在方向上达成了一致，即’(原作)并不是典型的青春闪光’，所以对话进行得很顺利。'Bocchi・za・Rock! Youth’并不想成为只被成年人思考的新鲜和天真的部分切割出来的东西。我们谈论了青春是隐藏在日常生活中的东西，比如去家庭餐厅或做兼职工作。如果我们能突出这样的地方，年轻人会感到真实，成年人也会感到真实的怀旧的闪光。

‘真实’这个词出现了，但为了使它变得真实，你注意了什么？ 在剧本中，我重视角色爆发但脚踏实地的感觉。我认为它是设定好的，所以当它与真实的现场交叉时，它不会浮起，而且是否能表达原作具有的奇妙的真实的人类气味。当将原作动画化时，角色的声音、动作和居住地的背景等信息量会增加。在原作的动画中，添加的信息的舵手非常重要。如果在这里犯错误，原作的粉丝会离开说’这和我想的不一样’，从动画读原作的人也会说’哦，和动画不一样’，这是危险的，所以我非常小心青春的程度和角色的气氛。

你是如何考虑系列的构成的？ 当我把它看作是一个季度的作品时，我想我想要2-3个大山，我想结束会在文化节左右。导演和制片人也有大致相同的意见。当我在做这个工作时，已经出版了两卷书，所以我想如果到这里，我可以不改变原作的意图，我把最后放在这里。

当你把4帧漫画压缩成每集超过20分钟时，你是如何考虑节奏感的？ 我的风格在节奏上相当快，但我觉得如果是这个原作，我可以不改变那个节奏感。另外，因为它是4帧，所以我寻找一个节奏，不会被切断，也不会被拉长。另外，因为有现场，我想那部分会保证作为电影的松弛。

你在那个时候就信任音乐会创造松弛。 是的。我知道所有的工作人员都非常有动力，而且在剧本会议的时候传达出来的是试图直接画音乐部分而不是欺骗的态度，所以我从一开始就信任它，感觉像是在一艘大船上。

在你组成系列的过程中，有什么让你困扰的事情吗？ 我并不困扰，但我考虑了如何从Natsuka和其他人来到Hitori的家的第7集到最后一集划分。我不想在文化节的现场结束，然后说’完成’，所以在寻找切割的地方时，最后一集不可避免地开始了一首歌。这是相当具有挑战性的构成，我想我必须信任音乐团队，但我想，‘这很有趣，所以没关系(笑)’。这部作品可能有很多像这样的事情。原来有一个在A部分做现场的构成，我想到那里需要跳跃步骤，但当我做的时候，我想，'这很有趣，所以让我们突然开始唱歌吧？'这个流程变成了这样。结果，我觉得非常好。"
